# Picker.js

Picker is a set of functions that perform music theory calculations relevant to fretted stringed instruments. This includes a basic capacity to lay out scales in comfortably playable positions. It includes an SVG generator capable of rendering fretboard diagrams with arbitrary string counts and tuning, annotated with chords and scales in a variety of styles.

Picker is currently in flux, and does not present a stable API. Its growth is driven by the author's musical curiosity, and it evolves as needed. That said, there is a useful set of core functionality that is unlikely to change, and the fretboard renderer is comprehensive and complete.

See these [Picker examples](https://rlk.github.io/picker/) for usage.

## Picker design notes

- Javascript arrays are not zero-indexed as such, so we're free to count beginning with 1 where convention dictates. In general, MIDI-derived concepts such as note, octave, and pitch class numbers are zero-indexed, while musically-derived concepts such as degree, tone, string, and finger are one-indexed.

- CSS styling
	https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG/Tutorial/SVG_and_CSS

- Picker applications work with collections of note records. Here is an example of the elements that might arise in a record representing B2 on a standard guitar, as generated by an application in C major.

	- chordTone: 7
	- scaleDegree: 7
	- root: 1
	- pitchName: "b"
	- pitchClass: 11
	- string: 4
	- fret: 2
	- note: 59
	- label: "B"

### Glossary

Picker takes many basic terms from music theory and associates them with specific data structures and interpretations.

- A *note* [0...127] gives a pitch.

	- Middle C is note 60 pitch class 0 octave 3
	- Middle C is string 4 fret 3 on a standard guitar
	- This corresponds to the MIDI standard

- A *string* [0...n) gives an index into an array of open string notes.

- An *octave* [-2..8] is a span of 12 notes.

- A *pitch class* [0..11] is an element of an *octave*.

- A *pitch name* is the non-unique name of a pitch class, eg "A♯" or "B♭".

	- These are handled internally as 'as' and 'bf', etc., and are mapped onto the associated Unicode symbols for display.

- A *key* is a set of pitches, given by pitch name.

	- The use of pitch name instead of pitch class encodes the fact that different keys assign different names to individual elements. For example, the keys of B and F both include pitch class 10, but the key of B includes A♯ while the key of F includes B♭.

	- Each key includes 7 elements, with exactly one element per letter.

	- We do not accommodate any key that requires double accidentals in its key signature. So, while E♭ is present, its equivalent D♯ is not. The enharmonic pair A♭ / G♯ is omitted completely.

- A *degree* [1..7] is an index into a key.

- A *scale* is a set of degrees.

- A *tone* [1..13] is a modular index into a key

	- This modularity encodes the fact that, for example, a 9th has the same pitch class as a 2nd, but sounds one octave higher. 

- An *accidental* [-2..2] modifies a chord tone.

- A *chord* is a set of tones with accidentals.

	- The use of tones rather than pitch classes allows a chord to unambiguously include, for example, both a 2nd and a 9th.

	- The encoding of chord elements as tones and accidentals rather than as degrees permits pitch labels to be generated appropriately for their key and use. For example, a C diminished 7th chord is notated with a flat-flat B instead of an A.

- An *instrument* is a fret count m plus a set of n notes giving open string tuning.

	- Strings are numbered beginning  with 1.
	- Frets are numbered beginning with 0, which corresponds to the open string.

- A *stop* is a string [0..n) with a fret [0..m].

- A *finger* [1..4] indicates the finger associated with a given stop.

- A *position* is a vague span of 4 or 5 frets relative to a given base fret.

- A *set* is a generic aggregation of notes

	- A set can represent a musical entity at most any level of detail. It might be an abstract chord voicing, a voicing mapped into a specific key, a list of stops giving that voicing on a particular instrument, a labeled and colored list indicating fingering, etc..

	- The general pattern of Picker usage is structured as a set of filters that receives an abstract set and iteratively adds information until a concrete representation emerges, as in this example.

### Todo list

- Ukulele examples
- Stop set boolean operations
- Bebop scale layout that overlays major scale positions
- Render partial fretboard
- Figure out better cross-platform text positioning
